>>NARRATOR: Following
decades of being excluded
from clinical
studies, women today
suffer the dire consequences.
Can new research finally
reverse the misunderstandings
and help women harness the
power of their unique biology?
>>KAYLA OSTERHOFF: What we
as women have to understand
is this biological
complexity that keeps us out
of the research is
actually our superpower.
>>NARRATOR: This is Gaia News.
>>[BACKGROUND MUSIC]
Kayla Ostheroff is a
neuropsychophysiologist
studying the
mind-body connection,
with a focus on women's health.
>>OSTERHOFF: Well, most people
are probably not aware of this,
but women actually represent the
largest gap in health science
research that exists today.
This is perpetuated by a problem
that actually manifested back
in 1977, when the
FDA formally banned
all women of
childbearing potential
from all clinical research.
That ban remained in
effect until 1993.
And to this day, the
damage has been done,
and women are still left out
of the clinical research.
The reason why women are left
out of the clinical research
is that women are
biologically complex.
Meaning that they are
biologically, biochemically,
and physiologically
shifting constantly
because of our
female hormone cycle
that drives our physiology.
The other reason is that women
are risky research subjects,
meaning that they can
become pregnant at any time
during the study.
So while this is understandable
from an ethical standpoint,
it cannot remain in effect,
because women are really being
disempowered by this gap.
>>NARRATOR: The repercussions
of this scientific gap
have been profound and were
highlighted in a recent study.
>>OSTERHOFF: From 1997
to today, what they
found is that most of the
drugs that have been removed
from the US market were
removed because of side-effects
that occurred mainly or
exclusively in women.
Women represent 78% of
all autoimmune diseases.
And women suffer from
depression two times more
than their male counterparts.
And women experience
burnout 200% more than men.
>>NARRATOR: These
serious consequences
all stem from the
misunderstanding of what
Osterhoff calls the missing
link in women's health.
>>OSTERHOFF: The
missing link is this.
That women are essentially
physiologically four
different people over
the course of a month.
And this is because our
biology, our physiology,
our biochemistry is
constantly shifting
with the ebb and flow
of our female hormones
throughout the month.
These two key hormones of
estrogen and progesterone
impact a woman's
global physiology.
>>NARRATOR: Emerging
research is finally
starting to bear out the
specific physiological
characteristics of
these biorhythms.
Osterhoff has gone
one step further
to examine how these
four distinct phases can
be leveraged by women to
better navigate their lives
and promote wellness
throughout the cycles.
>>OSTERHOFF: What we as
women have to understand
is this biological
complexity that keeps us out
of the research is
actually our superpower.
Because of these
neurological shifts
that happen in
phase one, a woman
experiences increased cognitive
empathy, AKA intuition.
Phase two, we have
a greater ability
for navigation and strategy.
In phase three, our cognitive
ability is charisma.
We are more influential
in this phase.
Now phase four is what
I call the brainy phase.
We have a heightened
ability to learn and grow.
>>NARRATOR: How can
women and society
best use these understandings?
>>OSTERHOFF: For women
to be properly supported,
it would look like understanding
that we are constantly
shifting.
And that we require
different environments,
different infrastructures,
and different support systems
through the different
phases of our biology.
So the key takeaway
here is that we
need to include women
in research equally.
We also need to do specific
studies focused primarily just
on women so that we can start
to shift the way that we view
and support women in this world.
>>NARRATOR: For a new
perspective, this is Gaia News.
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.